Welcome to the what should have been the first dev log of Heavy Athlete. I am Michael McDougal the creator of Heavy Athlete. Although you may know me better as Marty the Scottish Mermaid. 

I'd like to talk today about the philosophy behind Heavy Athlete. 

Heavy Athlete was born because my brother was fed up with the interface on NASGA. Cabermetrics was way better but you couldn't enter games. Coming from Strongman he wanted a site like Iron Podium where the entire process of running an event could be managed from a single spot. He asked me if I could fix everything and I told him to give me a month to see if it was viable. Well here we are so obviously I did it. Many others have tried to do exactly what I've done so why did they fail and I succeed? Well if you can look through my survivor bias I think it is because of the philosophy behind the site.

At first Matthew, my brother, just wanted to pay me have a better site and move on. When I told him the time and complexity required we realized that wouldn't work for either of us. What would be better is to monetize the site so that we could have a perpetual improvement process. If something is paying me I am way more likely to actually work on it. So I started working on Heavy Athlete and tried to figure out how to make it make money.

I have said it before and I will say it again. Everything that is free on NASGA and Cabermetrics will be free on Heavy Athlete forever. In perpetuity. Or at least as long as the site stays up. This raises my first requirement for the site. "The site must be able to outlive me"  I want to the site to live forever even if I wont. One of the main problems with NASGA is the lack of updates. Our records are wrong, the classes haven't kept up, the entry mechanism is a mess, the ways to view the data are primitive and the site just looks old. The heart of the problem is someone has to work to fix these things. If you cant pay someone then they wont work for months or years for free. So in order for the site to outlive me it has to make money. 

Offering a bunch of stuff for free also removes a huge amount of potential profit. I can't just be a nicer interface and make people pay for that. There goes SAAS 101. Okay so how do I make money? I realized that if I could offer a free product that was exceptional I would get the users. Then if I could tie profits to the games themselves that I would be golden. I came up with my mantra and second guiding point for the site. "The tide raises all boats" The first form of monetization is invisible to athletes. When athletes sign up for a game on Heavy Athlete and have to pay a fee a part of that fee is sent to Heavy Athlete itself. This is similar to how Iron Podium makes money but the exact formulae are different. We charge less below $200 dollars per athlete and more above $200. The total app fee for directors is 5% that includes credit card fees and everything else. If you want to know that exact amount we make its 2.1% - 30 cents per transaction. So you paid $15 to sign up for a game on Heavy Athlete, I made 2 cents you paid $100 I made $1.80. Oh and importantly you didn't pay through Heavy Athlete? I made nothing but everything is still offered and available for that game director. So why did I set in up this way? Notice that I do better as the sport does better. The more games people host on me and the more athletes I can connect to those games the more money I make. But the athletic director will always make more. But as ADs come around to using the site they bring in more athletes which I then connect with more ADs its more people enjoy the games the more everyone profits, ADs and me financially and athletes athletically.

Okay third guiding point for the site. "There can be Only One!" yes that is a highlander quote. If your curious the internal name for the project is Highlander. This point kind of flys in the face of the "The tide raises all boats". It sounds like I have to kill off my competition. And it is true that the ecosystem is too small. It cannot support a creature as large as a walrus so while the tide raises all boats directive forces me to expand our ecosystem the other way to make a walrus fit is to remove some competition. Cabermetrics has already retired and I wish him much rest. I would like it if everyone else retired to. But that's not really what I mean here. I believe in a free market and may the best product or idea win. Instead its much more inspired after the linux kernal. I don't think that a company can survive the early years without a strong central authority. This is why although many of you have offered very kindly to donate time and work to Heavy Athlete I have never accepted. Its not that I don't think that others couldn't help. I know others are better programmers than me. Its that I'm not ready to hand over the reigns. I understand intimately how every part of the system works. When I see a bug I usually don't have to open an editor and read the code. I usually see the code overlaid on my vision and understand how the error occurred. On the one hand to the uninitiated that sounds cool. Those who are programmers know what a curse that level of familiarity can be. Heavy Athlete is already feature complete with NASGA, and Cabermetrics. We also have the parts I wanted parity on with Iron Podium. Additionally we have new features that none of those sites have. So I understand why people think I'm done and that new folks can help. I am still working on refining the interfaces for ADs, I still have more features than I can shake a stick add that I want to add, and I haven't met the first directive yet. While the site can generate enough money to outlive basically indefinitely already. To actually get it ready for someone else to step in is still a lot of hard work. I still make database schema changes at least every two months. It is not ready for someone else. So while "There can be Only One!" sounds like a direct challenge to others, its actually a directive to myself. I have to continue to completely understand the system so that I can continue to modify into my vision. That means I have to do it alone.

So sorry to everyone that wants me to open source so they can peek at the code. But you don't get a scaffold to build a competing site that easy.

There are other guiding principles for the site like "Accuracy above kindness", "It should be so easy walrus can use it", and "Keep it fun". But I think that each of those topics deserve an entire episode to themselves. I'm going to continue to releases these weekly. So if you enjoyed come back next weekend for a discussion on why the site went down last week here's a hint it was an OOM.


This has been Michael McDougal from Heavy Athlete. I'll see you next time after I break some more things.